THE TRUCE BETWEEN ISRAEL AND
HAMAS IS OVER.
ONCE AGAIN, EXPLOSIONS ARE
ROCKING GAZA AND GIANT PLUMES OF
SMOKE ARE RISING OVER THAT
SKYLINE.
THE FIGHTING STARTED JUST
MINUTES AFTER THE SEVEN-DAY
TRUCE EXPIRED AT MIDNIGHT
EASTERN TIME.
ISRAEL ACCUSED HAMAS OF BREAKING
THE DEAL BY FIRING A ROCKET.
THE HAMAS-CONTROLLED MINISTRY OF
HEALTH IN GAZA SAYS TODAY'S
STRIKES HAVE ALREADY KILLED AT
LEAST 32 PEOPLE.
THIS IS THE AFTERMATH OF A
STRIKE IN SOUTHERN GAZA THIS
MORNING.
>> SO, WHAT HAPPENS NOW?
QATAR'S MINISTRY OF FOREIGN
AFFAIRS, THE KEY INTERMEDIARY
SAYS NEGOTIATIONS ARE UNDER WAY
TO PAUSE THE FIGHTING AGAIN.
THE STAKES COULD NOT BE HIGHER?
ISRAEL SAYS 137 HOSTAGES ARE
STILL MROOEFD TO BE IN GAZA.
A SENIOR U.S. OFFICIAL SAYS
BEFORE THE TRUCE FELL APART IN
THE FINAL HOURS LAST NIGHT,
HAMAS IS CLAIMING IT DID NOT
HAVE ANY MORE WOMEN OR CHILDREN
HOSTAGES TO EXCHANGE.
ISRAEL SAYS THAT IS NOT TRUE AT
ALL.
THE SAME OFFICIAL TELLS ME HAMAS
DID NOT EVEN SUBMIT A LIST OF
POTENTIAL HOSTAGES FOR RELEASE
LAST NIGHT.
SO, WHAT HAPPENS TO THE
CIVILIANS IN GAZA?
THE BIDEN ADMINISTRATION IS
PRESSURING ISRAEL TO HELP
PROTECT PALESTINIANS.
THE SECRETARY ON STATE ON THE
GROUND YESTERDAY TALKING ABOUT
EXACTLY THAT.
ORREN LIEBERMAN STARTS US OFF.
THE IDF IS DROPPING LEAFLETS IN
SOUTHERN GAZA.
WHAT DO WE KNOW ABOUT THE SCALE
OF THE OPERATIONS UNDER WAY
RIGHT NOW?
>> Reporter: PHIL, ISRAEL AND
HAMAS INDICATED THEY WERE READY
TO RESTART FIGHTING IF
NEGOTIATIONS FELL APART.
THAT'S WHAT HAPPENED AROUND 7:00
THIS MORNING.
WE HAVE SEEN THE SKYLINE OF
GAZA, WE HAVE HEARD THE STRIKES
THE IDF IS CARRYING OUT IN GAZA.
THE WAR IS BACK ON AS ISRAEL AND
HAMAS PROMISED.
WE HAVE SEEN ISRAEL CARRYING OUT
STRIKES IN SOUTHERN GAZA, WHERE
THEY SAID THEY WOULD FOCUS THE
SECOND PHASE OF THEIR OPERATION.
ACCORDING TO HEALTH OFFICIALS IN
GAZA, 32 PALESTINIANS HAVE BEEN
KILLED IN GAZA IN THE FIRST
HOURS OF THE RESUMPTION OF
FIGHTING.
ISRAEL HAS DROPPED LEAFLETS IN
PARTS OF SOUTHERN GAZA.
INTERESTINGLY, THEY HAVE A QR
CODE THAT BRINGS YOU TO A MAP
WITH GAZA BROKEN UP INTO VERY
TINY PARCELS.
IT SEEMS AS IF ISRAEL IS TRYING
TO EVACUATE THESE PARTS IN AN
ATTEMPT TO AVOID CIVILIAN
CASUALTIES AS THE FIGHTING
RESUMES AT PACE.
SECRETARY OF STATE BLINKEN WAS
JUST HERE.
HE SAID ISRAEL HAD TO HAVE A
CONCRETE PLAN TO PROTECT
CIVILIANS BEFORE THEY LAUNCHED
THE SECOND PHASE OF THEIR
OPERATION.
THAT IS NOW HERE.
HE ALSO SAID ISRAEL NEEDED A
PLAN FOR MORE HUMANITARIAN
ASSISTANCE AND AID TRUCKS
OUTSIDE OF GAZA, WHICH HAVE
ALREADY BEEN INSPECTED BY
ISRAEL, HAVE NOT GONE IN SINCE
THIS MORNING.
PHIL, IT IS VERY MUCH A QUESTION
OF WHETHER THAT HUMANITARIAN AID
HAS BEEN CUT OFF WITH THE
FIGHTING RESUMED.
>> WHAT ABOUT NEGOTIATIONS, ARE
THEY ONGOING AT THE PACE THEY
WERE TO EXTEND THIS FROM FOUR
DAYS TO SEVEN DAYS OR HAVE THEY
STOPPED AS WELL?
>>.
>> Reporter: POPPY, NEGOTIATIONS
ARE ONGOING, ACCORDING TO QATARI
AND U.S. OFFICIALS.
THE EFFORT IS VERY MUCH THERE.
IT'S WORTH REMEMBERING WE GOT TO
THE TRUCE THROUGH NEGOTIATIONS
DURING FIGHTING.
WHY DID THEY BREAK DOWN?
ISRAEL BELIEVES THERE ARE ENOUGH
WOMEN AND CHILDREN HELD BY HAMAS
IN GAZA TO CONTINUE FOR AT LEAST
A DAY LONGER.
HAMAS NOT CLEAR THEY AGREE WITH
THAT SENTIMENT.
THEY BLAMED ISRAEL FOR A
BREAKDOWN IN NEGOTIATIONS SAYING
THEY WERE READY TO BEGIN TALKS
ON THE OTHER GROUPS, ELDERLY
WOMEN AND SOLDIERS, WOMEN AND
MEN, TO CONTINUE THE TRUCE AND
RELEASE MORE OF THE HOSTAGES.
THEY'RE LOOKING FOR A BIGGER
DEAL HERE.
THAT'S WHAT THE INTERNATIONAL
COMMUNITY IS PUSHING FOR AS
WELL.
BUT WITH NO LIST HANDED TO
ISRAEL OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
THAT COULD BE RELEASED, THE
FIGHTING HAS ONCE AGAIN STARTED.
WE'LL SEE IF POSSIBLE AND HOW
LONG IT MIGHT TAKE TO GET TO
ANOTHER POINT WHERE THERE IS
ANOTHER PAUSE.
>> ORREN LIEBERMAN IN TEL AVIV,
THANK YOU.
LET'S BRING IN RETIRED AIR FORCE
COLONEL CEDRIC LEIGHTON.
ISRAEL IS NOW DROPPING LEAFLETS
ON KHAN YUNIS IS LOCATED SOUTH
OF THE LINE THAT IS BEFORE WHERE
ALL THE RESIDENTS WERE TOLD TO
EVACUATE FROM THE NORTH TO THE
SOUTH.
SO, NOW THEY'RE DROPPING
LEAFLETS IN KHAN YUNIS SAYING
THIS IS A FIGHTING ZONE,
EVACUATE IMMEDIATELY.
WHAT DO YOU BELIEVE THE IDF IS
ABOUT TO DO?
>> GOOD MORNING, POPPY.
WHAT WE'RE SEEING ARE MOVEMENTS
DOWN TO THE SOUTH.
KHAN YUNIS IS RIGHT DOWN HERE.
WHAT THAT DOES IS IT SHOWS THEY
ARE TRYING TO MOVE EVERYBODY
INTO THIS AREA.
IF YOU LOOK AT THIS MAP RIGHT
HERE, THIS IS THE DAMAGE MAP
THAT WE'VE SEEN WITH THE
PREVIOUS STRIKES, RIGHT IN THIS
AREA.
THAT'S WHERE MOST OF THE DAMAGE
HAS OCCURRED IN THE NORTHERN
PART OF GAZA.
THERE IS SOME DAMAGE IN THE
CENTRAL PART.
BUT KHAN YUNIS AND THE AREA
AROUND RAFAH, THEY'VE HAD
MINIMAL DAMAGE.
THEY'RE TRYING TO MOVE EVERYBODY
INTO THE SOUTHERN AREAS.
SO, ALONG THIS -- THESE
EVACUATION ROUTES RIGHT HERE,
THE COASTAL ROAD RIGHT HERE,
WAW
WADI GAZA IS THE DIVIDING LINE.
NOW THEY'RE MOVING INTO THE
SOUTHERN PART.
WE BELIEVE THEY'RE GOING TO TRY
TO HAVE SOME AREAS RIGHT IN HERE
THAT ARE AREAS WHERE THEY'RE
GOING TO BRING THE CIVILIAN
POPULATION INTO THEM.
BUT HAVING SAID THAT, THEY ARE
ALSO GOING TO BE MOVING THEIR
MILITARY FORCES IN THIS AREA.
THE IDF WILL BE DOING THAT
PROBABLY AS NEXT PHASE OF THEIR
OPERATIONS.
>> WE HAVE SPOKEN OVER THE LAST
COUPLE DAYS ABOUT THE INTENSIVE
BEHIND-THE-SCENES TALKS.
U.S. HE FISHLS TRYING TO
PRESSURE ISRAELI COUNTERPARTS TO
SCOPE, SHAPE, BE PRECISE ABOUT
OPERATIONS IN THE SOUTH.
WHY ARE THEY TARGETING THE
SOUTH?
>> THE REASON THEY'RE TARGETING
THE SOUTH, PHIL, IS THAT RIGHT
IN THIS AREA THEY BELIEVE THAT
ALL OF THE HAMAS FIGHTERS RZ
BASICALLY MOVING IN HERE.
THERE ARE SOME THAT WILL STAY IN
THE NORTH, ALTHOUGH IT'S
EXTREMELY DAMAGED.
IN THE SOUTH THEY'RE EXPECTING
THEM TO BE THERE.
WHAT THE IZ REALLIES ARE DOING
IS BASICALLY CALLED SHAPING
OPERATIONS.
THESE SHAPING OPERATIONS ARE
DESIGNED TO MOVE PEOPLE IN
CERTAIN DIRECTIONS.
THERE ARE TWO TYPES OF PEOPLE
THE ISRAELIS ARE WORRIED ABOUT
HERE.
THE REFUGEES, THE CIVILIAN
POPULATION, BUT FOR THEM, MORE
IMPORTANTLY FROM A MILITARY
PERSPECTIVE, THE HAMAS FIGHTERS.
AND THEY BELIEVE THOSE FIGHTERS
WILL BE MOVING IN THESE AREAS AS
WELL, TO BLEND INTO THE CIVILIAN
POPULATION AND AVOID BEING
STRUCK.
>> WE APPRECIATE IT.
>>> 21-YEAR-OLD MIA SHEM WAS ONE
OF THE FINAL HOSTAGES RELEASED
IN THE LAST HOURS OF THE TRUCE.
>> THAT'S HER BEING REUNITED AT
AN AIR FORCE BASE IN SOUTHERN
ISRAEL.
THIS IS BEFORE AND THIS IS HER
EXITING A CAR BEING HANDED OVER
TO THE RED CROSS TO BE TAKEN
BACK HOME.
THAT'S HER MOTHER THE MOMENT SHE
FOUND OUT ABOUT HER RELEASE.
MIA ATTENDED THE MUSIC FESTIVAL
WHERE SHE WAS KIDNAPPED.
SHE APPEARED IN THE FIRST
HOSTAGE VIDEO RELEASED BY HAMAS.
HER ARM SEVERELY WOUNDED AND
BANDAGED NOW.
SHE IS BACK HOME.
>>> THIS MORNING WE ARE GETTING
NEW REPORTING ABOUT THE BIDEN
ADMINISTRATION'S ATTEMPT TO
SHAPE ISRAEL'S NEXT OFFENSIVE IN
GAZA, A PHASE UNDER WAY NOW THAT
THOSE TALKS TO EXTEND THE PAUSE
HAVE FALLEN APART.
SECRETARY OF STATE ANTONY
BLINKEN MADE THREE HARD REQUESTS
WHILE ON THE GROUND IN ISRAEL
YESTERDAY.
YOU SEE HIM THERE SPEAKING WITH
PRIME MINISTER BENJAMIN
NETANYAHU.
ALSO MET BEHIND CLOSED DOORS
WITH NETANYAHU AND HIS WAR
CABINET.
THE FIRST OF THOSE THREE
CRITICAL ELEMENTS CONTINUE TO
EXPAND THE CURRENT SURGE --
CURRENT AND EXPAND THE CURRENT
SURGE OF HUMANITARIAN AID.
THERE'S BEEN A MAJOR SURGE
DURING THE PAUSE IN HOSTILITIES.
SECOND TRYING TO FIND NEW WAYS
TO HAVE HUMANITARIAN AID.
THIRD, A CLEAR AND UNAMBIGUOUS
PLAN TO MINIMIZE CASUALTIES IN
THE SOUTH.
JOINING US SO DISCUSS IS DAVID
SANGER.
I WANT TO START WITH THAT LAST
POINT BECAUSE THIS HAS BEEN DUAL
TRACK TO SOME DEGREE.
THERE HAVE BEEN THE INTENSIVE
DISCUSSIONS AND NEGOTIATIONS
TRYING TO EXTEND THE PAUSE THAT
HAD BEEN IN PLACE, THE HOSTAGE
SWAPS, AND THEN A SECOND TRACK
OF U.S. OFFICIALS WORKING WITH,
TALKING TO, IMPRESSING ISRAELI
COUNTERPARTS WHAT THIS OPERATION
IN THE SOUTH WILL LOOK LIKE.
HOW MUCH LEVERAGE DO THEY HAVE
HERE?
>> GOOD MORNING, PHIL.
THE MAIN WEAPON IS U.S. HAS
WEAPONS AND GOING TO CONGRESS --
OR THE ADMINISTRATION IS GOING
TO CONGRESS FOR AN ADDITIONAL
$14 BILLION IN AID.
ONE OF THE DEBATES UNDER WAY IN
CONGRESS RIGHT NOW IS WOULD
THERE BE CONDITIONS PLACED ON
THAT AID?
SOMETHING YOU WRITE IN THE LAW
COULD BE A LOT CLUNKIER THAN
SOMETHING THAT THE SECRETARY OF
STATE CAN NEGOTIATE OUT WITH THE
ISRAELIS.
IF YOU JUST BACK THIS UP OVER,
SAY, THE PAST SEVEN WEEKS OR SO,
WE'VE GONE FROM THE PRESIDENT
SAYING I'M UNAMBIGUOUSLY BEHIND
ISRAEL TO THE PRESIDENT SAYING,
DO NOT MAKE THE MISTAKES WE
MADE, THE EXCESSES WE MADE AFTER
9/11, TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE
IN HIS VISIT SAYING, THERE ARE
FAR TOO MANY PALESTINIANS BEING
CALLED, TO NOW THE STATE
DEPARTMENT SAYING, HERE ARE
THREE SPECIFIC CONDITIONS.
THEY ARE TRYING TO PUT THE
SQUEEZE ON THE ISRAELIS, IN
FARTHER, BY MAKING PUBLIC
EXACTLY WHAT THESE DEMANDS ARE.